It's Thursday, the 18th of June, 1981. And we are at
the residence of Hugo Leipziger Peirce in Austin,
Texas. Hugo,
why did you arrive in Houston? I mean in Austin. And
what brought you to Texas initially? What did you
find yourself doing here? Well, Bob, this is sort
of an interesting little story. I came from
Australia in early 1939 to finish the Australian
Pavilion at the New York World's Fair, which was
part of the British Pavilion. And at that time, I
came as a visitor here being employed by
Australia, by the Australian government, and met
some old friends in Washington. I was introduced
to Katherine Bauer. Oh, really? She was on my
thesis committee at Berkeley. Oh, she was. And I
met Oskar Stonerow and Berla and my friend from
study days, Alfred Kastner. So it didn't take very
long, and I was asked if I would be interested in
staying here, although I couldn't formally do it.
But through various good offices, I got
permission to work in the United States, despite
my visiting status. And because I could produce a
number innovative public housing schemes, which
I had done in Germany some years back on that date.
And so at that time, I also received, through
Katherine Bauer, the recommendation to the
Rockefeller Foundation for a grant. And I
received a three-year fellowship
that could be used in connection with any
university. But it was already too late in the year
because any university availing herself of this
grant had to get into some commitment to continue a
planning program because you've got to remember
that at that time the Rockefeller and the Carnegie
Foundations had given $240,000 equally
distributed between Columbia University,
Harvard, and MIT, $80,000 each, to start a
planning program. And so it was very difficult, so
I decided almost to go back to Australia because it
was difficult to get this commitment at that late
period. So... On my way to San Francisco, I stopped
in Austin, in Texas, to be exactly in some smaller
towns where I knew some people. And there I
received a telephone call from my friend Alfred
Kestner, who was a consultant in Washington, that
Carl Feist from Columbia University, who had been
hunting in Canada when I went to Columbia, had
asked for me. So I went all the way back to New York.
And it turned out to be, yes, they would consider
this, but for this particular year, it was
difficult to get the commitment for the period
after the three years were over. At that time, I
stopped by again in Washington, DC, and my friend
Alfred Kessner and I came back from some lecture
that evening, and the radio was on. Well, in the
middle of the talk, one couldn't very easily
determine who it was. But it turned out to be Maura
Maverick, who was a congressman from Texas who had
just been appointed mayor of San Antonio. And
Alfred Kessner said, well, that's your man. So he
was hunted up. And he said, well, sure, I would like
to have somebody who is conversant in housing
planning matters. But the Rockefeller people
said, no, it has to go through a university. And he
said, well, that's easy, too. because Homer
Pirani, who was the head of the National Youth
Group in Washington, National Youth
Organization, I forget the name, had just been
made president of the University of Texas. And so
between them, it worked out that I was accepted.
Homer Pirani, as president of the University of
Texas, committed the university to this
procedure, and that's how I came to Austin, Texas,
and I'm here ever since. Did you have much contact
with Catherine? Yes, yes, yes. I retained this
contact because she at that time had taken the
assignment which originally went to Louis
Mumford to go to Russia and write on housing
conditions and housing projects in Soviet
Russia. He didn't want to go, he didn't go, and
Kathrin Bauer got the job. She went to Europe, but
in London she had a very, very bad taxi accident and
was laid off. So she couldn't go on. In the
meantime, the war situation had started. What
year was that? That was all in 1939. 1939.
Bad year here. The end of 39, yes. And so she, by the
time I was in Texas, she dropped me a little line
that she had received an appointment at Berkeley
to be on the faculty of the Home Economics
Department, I believe, on housing matters. So she
came through Austin, Texas, went on to Berkeley,
and as you know, married... Bill Worcester.
Eventually. Eventually, who had been an
architect on war housing in San Francisco. And the
war was started. And he and she both went to MIT,
where he enrolled as a graduate student. And I
visited again in their converted old apartment.
And as you know, the story is he wound up as the dean
of University of California at Berkeley. Let me
interject here a moment, because this is
interesting, because when they both returned to
Berkeley, they were successful in buying a house
at Greenwood Commons. from an old Stockton
family. And Bill Worcester was a native of
Stockton, California. And no one could approach
this old lady except Bill Worcester, who had
apparently done work for the family,
architectural work. And so he was able to buy
Greenwood Commons. And there was an old house at
the lower end of it that Bill and Catherine wanted
to move into initially while they were redoing the
big house at the upper end of the Commons. And as a
student assistant, it was my responsibility to do
the measured drawings for their house. And so I got
to know both of them quite personally before they
were ever actively teaching. Well, Catherine,
this sort of way of record, of course, known, I
suppose. Catherine's sister was in the
University of Oklahoma in Norman as a librarian, I
believe. Oh, yeah. And so this is all history now,
of course. But I kept up with them. They came to
Austin. She came to Austin several times. And
so the rest is a long story in itself.
But she was instrumental in getting my
Rockefeller right. And then through Mari
Maverick in San Antonio, you ended up here in
Austin under the auspices of the University of
Texas. Yes. And what was your first assignment?
Was it as a researcher then? No, I was put on the
faculty. It was a difficult thing to arrange. They
approached several different groups like the
Bureau of Municipal Research, for instance, and
government, you know. But they were all so set.
Budgets were very, very tight. Nobody wanted to
commit anything beyond three years. So I wound up
in the School of Architecture, which was my
background anyway. I was an architect and a
housing person, you know. Sure. So
the...
University, the School of Architecture, started
a conference. It was called the First Texas
Housing Conference. And so there's a... the
proceedings of this thing, various people and
speeches given, you know, in the usual form. But
then, by way of evolution, I taught a course on
housing and city planning. And the architects and
the interested people in the city of Austin
attended this course, which was at 8 o'clock in the
morning, so people could take it before they went
to the offices. And... I was very pleased, so the
people who are now all practicing architects were
there. But pretty soon the enrollment dropped
completely, and a year later, in 1940, we were in
fact in the College of Engineering. And the then
dean, W. W. Woolrich, who was from the family who
owns the National Radiator Company
in New York, who was also an officer in the TVA to
replace and build new towns for the people who had
to be replaced because of the dam building and the
inundation of certain areas. He was very much
interested in what we were doing, what I was doing
in particular, because I was number seven on the
faculty. The School of Architects was a very small
faculty with a very large enrollment. Was Mel
Roach here at that time? He came here after the war.
But
I heard that the cause of engineering had started a
course in Houston, the city of Houston, under the
Office of Education in Washington programs
called ESMDT, Engineering Science Management
Defense Training. So I decided I would ask for
this, but everybody said, well, what has that to do
with the war effort to train people who would fit
into a new production because the city of Houston
at the time had about 240 workshops I believe and
they had to be traveled 24 hours a day and then they
had to build additions to existing workshops and
build new ones and obviously housing and
transportation all these things were quite
important so I got a questionnaire for the Office
of Education in Washington to fill out. And they
asked the question, minimum number of
enrollment. And I said, well, if we get about under
15 people, it wouldn't make any difference. And
maximum number of enrollment, I said, well,
unless we get maybe 35 people just way up, you know,
someplace. So it was approved, to everybody's
surprise. And that was the first ESMBT program in
housing and city planning in the United States of
this kind. Well, I went down to Houston. It's
really funny. Each one of these things has a whole
history, because the city of Houston, and I have a
letter here from Mr. Bloom, who was the director of
the housing authority there, who gave sort of an
account what we did. 41, 42, and out of it came a
graduate credit course in Houston, as well as
Dallas and Fort Worth. Now, ESMDT at that time
became, the war started the year afterwards,
became ESMWT, Engineering Science Management
War Training. And we kept going both in Houston,
Dallas, and Fort Worth. Well, at that time, the
question of people enrolling in this. And as I
said, we were supposedly getting about 15 people.
The first organization meeting at the Chamber of
Commerce in Houston showed up 168 people. I didn't
know what to do. You split that up into several
sections. And so here we went. There were all the
city council, the planning commission, the
architects, the engineers, the landscape
architects, the planning people who were there,
and a lot of others. And among these other people
was a young lady who came and said, I don't know
anything about all this, and I would like to know
more about it. My husband has been transferred
from Washington, DC. He's an attorney. I'm a
newspaper woman. So she did, and she wound up as the
public relations person in the Houston Housing
Authority. But I mention this because it was not
until 1952, I believe, when the director position
of the Housing Authority of San Antonio became
vacant. And she became the director of the Housing
Authority in San Antonio. Now, at that time, the
Housing Authority had about 6,000 or maybe 8,000
units to build, an enormous project, and a number
of architects took part in all this. And she did a
very, very good job. To make the long story short,
she wound up as commissioner of housing in
Washington, D.C. And Marie McGuire. So you know,
this is sort of an interesting individual. people
came out. But coming back to these training
courses, of course we got all the money we needed to
make, you know, bought equipment, bought
literature, bought, made slides, thousands of
slides, and that was really the beginning of our
whole planning effort at the University of Texas.
And then the graduate school on request from both
the Dallas as well as the Houston people
established a extension graduate center in
Houston and Dallas, and people who qualified for
it could get graduate credit for it. So then the war
continued, of course, and I, after I finally
immigrated in 1943,
because I was here a visitor who had to immigrate
officially, I joined the Navy B-12 training
program at the University of Texas, and that was an
interesting experience of a kind of quite
different nature. But that got me in touch with
California. The first time I went in this
connection to California on one of these troop
trains, you know, breaking down in the desert and
getting the fresh breeze as you came to Manning,
Banning. People opening the windows and
everything, you know. And that's when I saw
California for the first time from Bakersfield at
8 in the morning on a Sunday in February. The train
got into Oakland. into the Bay Area that midnight,
and all day long, it was a brilliant day in
sunshine, the nature was out, everything was
green, the Sierra was sitting there, snow-clad,
and no more such a view, you see, because now it's
all smog, San Joaquin Valley, you can't see it
anymore. That's right up the middle of the San
Joaquin Valley, then, on that train. On that
train, yes. Oh, it was marvelous, because there
was no smog. Well, anyway, so that became really
the beginning of the whole planning program. The
war was over, and now then a rash of projects came
in, all in connection with helping communities.
And I have a whole bevy of catalogs and letters and
stuff here. The first project was a rather
interesting one. It was called the Burnett Plan.
Bernard, Texas is a little community outside of
that, about 60 miles out of Austin. And a young
mayor, a doctor, asked us to come and see what we
could do. So we started with our veterans coming
back to school shortly after the war. And we
started groups that worked with groups in that
little community of 8,000 people. And that was our
first. It was sponsored by the American Legion in
Washington. because the American Legion was
looking for some popular projects, and they had
done, of course, the veterans bonus, as you
remember, that was a big thing, and then came the
community planning, because they had on their
board a member of the Economic Commission of the
American Legion, and it happened to be from
Austin, Minnesota, the meatpacking plant, What
is the name? I forget. Not Morrell. Marmer? No. But
anyway, so one of the big meatpackers, you know. He
had done something very similar in Austin,
Minnesota. And so the American Legion went around
and asked for a community to volunteer, and
Bernard did it. And so the governor, and it was an
enormous thing all over the state of Texas. But
unfortunately, then the... The Korean War
started in 1950, and this whole project was no
longer needed, and the project as such
disappeared in a sense. But it was quite a thing
because the then
commander of the American Legion came to us. It was
a big thing. All these things, these projects
helped us. And from then on, one community after
another came and wanted some help. Now, this was
about 1947? No, no, that is now 50, after the war was
over. I see. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52.
As a whole, I have all listed here. You can take a
look at it. If we go back to the year 1943, or 44, I
guess it would be, the end of June of 44, Ellen
Taniguchi was studying architecture at
Berkeley. And he was in Professor Howard Moise's
design class. And a good friend of mine, a high
school buddy of mine, had invited me to the party at
Howard Moise's house up on Panoramic Drive in
Berkeley. And that's when I first met Ellen
Taniguchi in 1944. Now,
Ellen went on to become the Dean of the College of
Architecture at the University of Texas here. How
did that happen? I don't know. Would you please
tell us how that happened? You see, it's really
fantastic how all these little stones fit
together. I mentioned to you a little earlier,
Warren Callister and my wife Martha's sister had
just returned with one of her women colleagues
from a five-year... sent with the Navy in Japan as
translator. And Martha talked her into building a
house in Berkeley rather than buying an old house.
And Warren Callister designed it just on the
border of Oakland and Berkeley in a little valley.
And Warren designed this very Japanese principal
house. That is where I met Alan Taniguchi, who drew
the earthquake structure requirements.
So, when he and his parents went to the lower Rio
Grande Valley shortly afterwards, in 54, maybe
55, something like this. He
settled down in the valley and one day he came to me
because I had the urban renewal project in
Mercedes in the lower valley. I had a little office
down there and he said, well, if you could be of any
help. And a few years or so later we met again in
Dallas at an AIA convention and he said, well,
O'Neill Ford suggested to talk to me about
teaching, because he didn't want to give up his
practice, but he wanted to come up maybe once or
twice a week or something like this to teach, and I
got him in here, you see. Now, from then on, he
worked his own way, you know, and from assistant
professor he became a full professor and dean. And
then he resigned. Then he resigned and went to Rice
University with our chancellor, or president at
the time, who became president of Rice
University. And that's where he worked with Crane
and that group. But he moved back to Austin,
although he's still teaching at Rice. That
collaboration didn't work out too well, I
understand. I don't know. I don't know those
details, but he doesn't talk about it, so I don't
know. But anyway, it's a different group of people
there, and... And he has practice here now in
Austin. So it's interesting how it all mashes
together neatly. Well, I understand that when
Alan left UT, he indicated in the newspaper why he
was leaving. Well, yes. So that's a public thing.
It's a public thing. It was a disagreement with the
then chairman of the Board of Regents, Mr. Irwin.
Irwin. Irwin, yes. And he took the side of the
environmentalists about not cutting down trees.
And they had some public argument about all this.
But these things get sort of lost in history.
Anyway, he made a good change. became a member of
the Houston Planning Commission. But he felt
maybe he wanted to come here. He is still working
all over the state. He's in the lower valley. He's
all over the place.
Hugo, let's talk a little bit about the initiation
of the planning program at University of Texas at
Austin, when that occurred. and the relationship
to the then American Institute of Planners and
your philosophy of planning education.
In ten words or
less. Well, my background as an architect and
housing office, I became active in the German
semi-official housing agency, DEWOG,
D-E-W-O-G, in Berlin, and became a regional
director for the province of Silesia, Upper and
Lower Silesia. And this gave me, between 1927 and
1932,
quite an opportunity to get into the total picture
of city planning. In fact, I took quite a few
courses and participated in any number of
competitions, among them the, you mentioned
Stockholm, I participated in 1932 in this
revitalization of the downtown area, this one
square mile downtown area of Stockholm. And the
same for Antwerp. Quite a number of these
projects. My interest in planning tied to the role
of housing, where I earned my first experience
with Bruno Taut and Martin Wagner in Berlin. And so
my visits here in 1939
brought me in contact with Mr. Strauss, who was at
the time the director of the column of the United
States Housing Agency, I believe it was. And in
fact, he wanted me to take my planning projects to
San Francisco. And at that time... Would that be
the Housing and Home Finance Agency? That was
prior to the Housing and Home Finance Agency.
Prior to that. United States Housing Agency I
think is the name and that became the HNHFA and you
know various NHA and so that caused me to
concentrate on this but of course my background is
in design and as coordinator of so many functions
in large scale housing I had a natural affinity to
the the demands and the requirements and the
academic training and research activities. So
when I came here, starting with housing, with the
demands of smaller communities into some help, it
grew naturally, you might say, into what in 1958
became the 701 Urban Planning Assistance
Program. And as such, having done the master plan
for Irving, Texas as a private consultant, I
became supervising
consultant to the health department. that had to
review all the planning done by planning
consultants for individual cities, a total of
about 110 cities, which ultimately, after I was
out already, grew to something like 260
communities all over Texas. See, that figure
isn't quite exact, but about this figure. The
state health department was designated the
planning agency for the state of Texas. Yes,
that's right. Under the Housing Act, Federal
Housing Act. That's exactly right, yes. And, of
course, that gave an enormous amount of
experience, and our students benefited
tremendously from it. Now, we had everything
worked out in 1951. When I
came to...
Back to Austin, after my work with the United
States State Department as a special consultant
to the United States High Commissioner for
Germany in 1951,
the graduate planning program had been already
approved by the then Dean Brogan of the graduate
school. I have all these letters. And we were...
Dean Brogan? Brogan, yes. And he's now retired.
And he authorized enrollment. And we started with
an enrollment. I have all these figures here in
detail, the people we started out with. When the
state legislature put a freeze on all new graduate
programs of any description. They're still doing
it. Well, again, I guess. And that was in 1951. And
the only way to salvage the graduate portion of our
planning effort at the school was to go with
existing master programs, like a master of
architecture in community and regional
planning, a master of arts in sociology,
economics, business administration, whatever
their qualifications were, with a major in
community and regional planning. Now, of course,
that was a tremendous handicap. We had a few people
who went through all this, but most people took the
courses and went on in their own area,
specializing in planning, let's say, in
sociology, economics, and so forth. Now, that
went on until the year 1959.